lab-shifts.md, before:

# ⏰ Lab Shifts

### First Week

The first week for each RA should be devoted to the following:

1. Ensuring RAs understand the content of this manual and general lab practices, including confirming that CITI training, Human Resources paperwork, and the hiring process have all been done
2. Training on the protocol for any ongoing or upcoming studies
3. Training on all the security and data management works in the lab
4. Testing tasks to ensure they work as intended and that the variables are recording correctly

### Supervisor

The graduate student or other senior lab personnel listed on the schedule for your corresponding time slot is considered your supervisor and is responsible for:

1. Ensuring RAs arrive when their shift begins and leave when it ends
2. Making sure the study protocol is being followed
3. Monitoring the progress of the study
4. Delegating tasks and duties to RAs
5. Filling in for RAs in the running or control room as needed
6. Assisting RAs with any aspect of the study procedures
7. Ensuring that breaks are taken for all qualifying shifts, and that they are taken at a reasonable time

### RA Assignments

There are two main roles that RAs perform on their shift: the "runner" and the "controller".

The "runner" is the one that sits in the running room to administer the tasks and take any notes in the electronic running room lab notebook.

The "controller" is the one that sits in the control room to monitor emails, schedule participants, welcome participants on arrival and obtain informed consent, maintain the subject database, and more.

It is up the RAs working the current shift to determine who does what role. In general, it is a good idea to get experience in both roles over the course of your time in the lab.

### When There is Nothing to Do

The RA in the control room will often find that there is a lot of down time. We highly prefer that you use that time to do lab related work and not use it for your own personal work or free time.&#x20;

Here is a list of things you can do when there is down time:

1.  **Check that the subject database is up-to-date**

    Have all the participants that came in today been added to the database. What about participants yesterday? Make sure their session date has been added! Is all their other information filled in?&#x20;
2. **Send out reminder emails** \
   Reminder emails need to be sent out for all participants coming in the next day
3. **Check that the schedule is accurate and updated**\
   Mistakes get made. That is okay. Always double check things like the schedule. For example, maybe you notice that a subject was scheduled twice for the same session. Check the email to see if they rescheduled, it might be the case that someone forgot to remove the session they needed to cancel.&#x20;
4.

### Absense & Tardiness

If you must miss a shift for a non-emergency reason, the lab manager or a graduate student needs to know **as soon as possible**, preferably with at least a day’s notice. You also need to try to find someone to cover your shift and give them reasonably advanced notice.

{% hint style="danger" %}
Missing shifts for class-related things (writing a paper, studying for a test, too much homework, etc.) is frowned upon. If this becomes a recurring issue, your hours will be reduced, or you may be replaced.
{% endhint %}

Emergencies come up. Let the lab manager or a graduate student know if something is going on and you need to miss on short notice. We reserve the right to ask for documentation and, if this becomes a common occurrence, we will do so.

It is important to be on time. You will often be relieving someone else or coming in just as the lab opens/participants start showing up; if your shift starts at 10:00am be **in the lab** at 10:00am. Occasionally an RA is scheduled to come in right after a class or your shift ends right before the start of another class. We try to schedule shifts to avoid such instances, but this is not always possible. If that is your situation, let the lab manager or supervising graduate student know in advance, and you will be fine to leave a few minutes early or come in a few minutes late without penalty. **Other than that, tardiness (being even a minute late) will not be tolerated.** Again, if there is a legitimate reason that you are habitually late, just come talk to someone about it.

###

Commit message:

GITBOOK-27: change request with no subject merged in GitBook

lab-shifts.md, after:

# ⏰ Lab Shifts

### First Week

The first week for each RA should be devoted to the following:

1. Ensuring RAs understand the content of this manual and general lab practices, including confirming that CITI training, Human Resources paperwork, and the hiring process have all been done
2. Training on the protocol for any ongoing or upcoming studies
3. Training on all the security and data management works in the lab
4. Testing tasks to ensure they work as intended and that the variables are recording correctly

### Supervisor

The graduate student or other senior lab personnel listed on the schedule for your corresponding time slot is considered your supervisor and is responsible for:

1. Ensuring RAs arrive when their shift begins and leave when it ends
2. Making sure the study protocol is being followed
3. Monitoring the progress of the study
4. Delegating tasks and duties to RAs
5. Filling in for RAs in the running or control room as needed
6. Assisting RAs with any aspect of the study procedures
7. Ensuring that breaks are taken for all qualifying shifts, and that they are taken at a reasonable time

### RA Assignments

There are two main roles that RAs perform on their shift: the "runner" and the "controller".

The "runner" is the one that sits in the running room to administer the tasks and take any notes in the electronic running room lab notebook.

The "controller" is the one that sits in the control room to monitor emails, schedule participants, welcome participants on arrival and obtain informed consent, maintain the subject database, and more.

It is up the RAs working the current shift to determine who does what role. In general, it is a good idea to get experience in both roles over the course of your time in the lab.

### When There is Nothing to Do

The RA in the control room will often find that there is a lot of down time. We highly prefer that you use that time to do lab related work and not use it for your own personal work or free time.&#x20;

Besides your normal responsibilities, here is a list of things you can do when there is down time:

1.  **Check that the subject database is up-to-date**

    Have all the participants that came in today been added to the database. What about participants yesterday? Make sure their session date has been added! Is all their other information filled in?&#x20;
2. **Check that the schedule is accurate and updated**\
   Mistakes get made. That is okay. Always double check things like the schedule. For example, maybe you notice that a subject was scheduled twice for the same session. Check the email to see if they rescheduled, it might be the case that someone forgot to remove the session they needed to cancel.&#x20;
3. **Are there enough lab / study materials?**\
   Do more subject folders need to be created? Are any forms printed out (e.g., informed consent)? Are we running low on any supplies - let the lab manager know.&#x20;
4. **Ask any graduate students and lab manager if there is anything to be done**\
   Do not ask Randy, however. We might have some tasks for you to do. Please do not hesitate to come ask us, even if 99% of the time we say no. It does not bother us, and we prefer it.
5. **Read our lab's publications (or publications related to our work)**\
   This is a great way to be more informed as to the actual research we are doing and would be required if you want to get more involved in the lab. See our [publications](https://englelab.gatech.edu/publications) page or ask any of the graduate students if there is anything you should be reading.
6. **Watch recorded lab meetings**\
   We will try to record our lab meetings, that way if you want to stay informed on current projects and data you can do so.
7. **Learn how to use R**\
   We primarily use the programming language R to manage and process our data. If you become familiar with how to use R, this would be a great way for you to get more involved in the research. You can learn from many of the resources that are available online in addition to our lab's [useRguide](https://englelab.gatech.edu/useRguide/) that covers workflows and packages more specific to our lab.
8. **Chat with us**\
   Feel free to come by to discuss and ask questions related to our current research, life as a student, advice, or whatever! We might be busy but we enjoy engaging with you all so do not hesitate.
9. **Keep the lab tidy**\
   If you have any dishes in the sink, clean them! If the trash is overflowing take it out (at the end of the hall by the refrigerator) or put it out in the hallway for the custodial staff. Keep things in the lab organized (if a stapler, pens, etc. is just hanging out on a table, put it back on the shelf where it belongs).

### Absense & Tardiness

If you must miss a shift for a non-emergency reason, the lab manager or a graduate student needs to know **as soon as possible**, preferably with at least a day’s notice. You also need to try to find someone to cover your shift and give them reasonably advanced notice.

{% hint style="danger" %}
Missing shifts for class-related things (writing a paper, studying for a test, too much homework, etc.) is frowned upon. If this becomes a recurring issue, your hours will be reduced, or you may be replaced.
{% endhint %}

Emergencies come up. Let the lab manager or a graduate student know if something is going on and you need to miss on short notice. We reserve the right to ask for documentation and, if this becomes a common occurrence, we will do so.

It is important to be on time. You will often be relieving someone else or coming in just as the lab opens/participants start showing up; if your shift starts at 10:00am be **in the lab** at 10:00am. Occasionally an RA is scheduled to come in right after a class or your shift ends right before the start of another class. We try to schedule shifts to avoid such instances, but this is not always possible. If that is your situation, let the lab manager or supervising graduate student know in advance, and you will be fine to leave a few minutes early or come in a few minutes late without penalty. **Other than that, tardiness (being even a minute late) will not be tolerated.** Again, if there is a legitimate reason that you are habitually late, just come talk to someone about it.

###
