# 🥼 Working in Our Lab

### General Responsibilities

Undergraduate research assistants (RAs) are the backbone of the lab and do much of the work that keeps data collection running smoothly. Responsibilities are primarily to recruit, schedule, remind, test, and pay participants. RAs also assist graduate students with research-related things like data entry, rudimentary data analysis, and proofreading documents/manuscripts. Other responsibilities include keeping the common areas of the lab clean and organized and managing our subject database. The bulk of the work can be done in the running and control rooms of the lab. However, occasionally on- and even off-campus recruitment may be necessary. More detailed responsibilities can be found in Section III.

### Why work in our lab?

While working in the Attention and Working Memory Lab, you will:

1. receive training in technical and ethical aspects of human subject research,
2. gain an understanding of how individual differences research is conducted,
3. potentially gain a moderate understanding of research methods, including specific techniques (e.g., eye-tracking, pupillometry, genetics, EEG),
4. potentially learn how to analyze and interpret behavioral and neuroimaging data,
5. receive acknowledgment in publications resulting from studies to which you contributed,
6. have the potential to be a co-author on manuscripts (see section “RAs as Authors on Publications” for further information),
7. interact with graduate students and get advice pertaining to research, coursework, careers, and psychology as a whole,
8. gain valuable experience that will inform your immediate and long-term career goals,
9. be able to have graduate students and/or Dr. Engle write letters of recommendation or serve as references (Note that we will be honest about our evaluation and do not guarantee a positive reference or recommendation. You may want to discuss this with us before using anyone from the lab as a reference so that you can have an idea of our impression of your quality of work while you were in the lab.), and
10. conduct your own research study (such as for a senior thesis) within the constraints of the type of questions we address and of the work being paid for by our grant sponsors and under the guidance of a graduate student or Post-Doc.

{% hint style="info" %}
Keep in mind that most of these benefits and outcomes are dependent on you and your level of involvement. Getting more involved in our research will take some initiative on your part, but, should you decide to do so, you will receive the full support of the lab in terms of guidance, mentorship, and feedback. Schedule a meeting with a graduate student or Post-Doc to discuss what opportunities there might be for you.
{% endhint %}

### What we study

Randy Engle’s Attention and Working Memory Lab studies cognitive functioning from the individual differences perspective. This involves assessing individuals’ cognitive abilities on a wide range of constructs (working memory capacity, attention control, task switching, updating, general discrimination ability, prospective memory, speed-accuracy tendencies, and so on) to

1. gain theoretical understanding of the underlying mechanisms behind these constructs,
2. investigate the relationships among these abilities, and
3. assess how these abilities predict performance on real world behavior and constructs, such as fluid intelligence, multitasking, language acquisition, and military performance.

As measured by Google Scholar, our lab’s work has been cited over 55,000 times which is the 10th most cited lab in all of Georgia Tech. The scope of our work is broad. We have conducted studies looking at genetic predictors of intelligence, using working memory capacity tasks to predict flight simulation errors among sleep-deprived Air Force pilots, using baseline pupil size to predict intelligence, assessing brain activity during complex tasks using electroencephalogram (EEG), and many others. We often collaborate with other researchers, with recent examples being investigating the negative effects of pollution in Mexico City on cognitive functioning and how cognitive ability and natural disasters play a role in the way impoverished farmers in Kenya make economic decisions (when to buy or sell livestock, type of crops grown, etc.).

**The trademark of the lab has been the use and development of tasks that measure working memory capacity.** Although Randy was not the first researcher to use a complex span task (this distinction belongs to Daneman and Carpenter (1980), who created a version of the reading span task), he was the first to argue that these tasks measure a domain-general ability (working memory capacity) that is critically important to human cognition and behavior. Although initially met with resistance from researchers who stuck to the typical experimental/behavioral tradition, Randy persisted in developing his theory and approach and changed how cognitive research is done today. He merged the differential (individual differences) and behavioral (or experimental) traditions and was awarded the prestigious Lifetime Achievement Award from the APA in 2013 for Division 3 (experimental psychology), which is “…given to individuals who have made sustained, outstanding, and unusual contributions to the history of psychology over the course of their careers,” and recognizes, “…a psychologist who has made long-lasting and distinguished theoretical or empirical contributions to basic research in experimental psychology.” For context, this award was first given in 2013 with Randy being the first recipient. There have been only seven subsequent recipients, including researchers like Henry (Roddy) Roediger, Larry Jacoby, and Mike Posner, all of whom you should hear about in either introduction to psychology or cognitive psychology courses.

The complex span tasks that the lab has continued to create, modify, and employ in most of our studies are available on the lab website for other researchers to download. In the last few years there have been over 1,500 researchers who have downloaded the tasks this way, and the tasks have been translated into nearly 20 languages. However, over the past several years, the lab has shifted its focus primary focus from working memory capacity to a related psychological construct, attention control. Most of our recent efforts involve defining and measuring attention control and its relationships with other constructs, including working memory capacity, fluid intelligence, and others.

**Working memory capacity, fluid intelligence, and attention control**

Three constructs form the core of the lab’s research agenda: working memory capacity, fluid intelligence, and attention control.

Working memory is the domain-general ability to simultaneously maintain, process, and manipulate chunks of goal-relevant information in consciousness, particularly in the face of distraction and interference. Research on working memory capacity is concerned with measuring the efficiency of an individual’s working memory system. It is typically estimated to be 3-5 chunks of information in normal functioning individuals (Cowan, 2001). You may also hear the term “short-term memory” mentioned. Some researchers use “short-term memory” and “working memory” interchangeably. Our lab does not. We see short-term memory as a much more passive storage system for information (like rehearsing a phone number over and over), whereas the defining characteristic of working memory is that information needs to be held and manipulated during periods of high cognitive demand. Short-term memory, therefore, can be conceptualized as being a part of working memory (the storage part), whereas working memory is both storage and a more active attentional component (which Randy has traditionally called executive attention or attention control, but other researchers have called the central executive).

Intelligence is a broad concept with many components. As such, it is important to consider which aspects of intelligence researchers are interested in. Our lab focuses predominately on a facet of intelligence called fluid intelligence. Fluid intelligence refers to an individual’s ability to reason, solve novel problems, and learn new information efficiently. This can be most easily contrasted with crystallized intelligence, which is the sum of everything a person has already learned up to the point of testing. Basically, crystallized intelligence is how much you know, while fluid intelligence is how well you learn (Cattell, 1963). Fluid intelligence is a critical cognitive ability for performing well in complex, fast-paced, and changing environments. Working memory capacity is one of the single best predictors of a person’s fluid intelligence (Ackerman et al., 2005; Engle et al., 1999; Kane et al., 2005; Kyllonen & Cristal, 1990; Oberauer et al., 2005).

While working memory capacity and fluid intelligence are important constructs, the lab has argued that they are often of secondary importance to attention control, also called executive attention and/or executive functioning. Our lab conceptualizes attention control as a central ability to most complex cognition, as it allows individuals to direct ongoing thought and behavior according to current goals. Those with better attention control are better at avoiding distraction and prioritizing relevant information. They are more likely to stay on task, remember important information, and to avoid repeating mistakes. We have also argued that individual differences in attention control contribute to individual differences in both working memory capacity and fluid intelligence, helping to explain why they are so strongly related: those with better attention control are likely to perform well on both working memory capacity tests and fluid intelligence tests (Draheim et al., 2020; Shipstead et al., 2016). Much of our recent work has focused explicitly on attention control, with working memory capacity and fluid intelligence taking a backseat. We have taken a special interest in ways to better measure attention control by developing and testing new psychological tasks (Draheim et al., 2019; 2020). We are also interested in potential applications of tests of attention control for improving personnel selection in terms of predicting success in vocational training and potentially leveling the playing field for minority groups who are often disadvantaged by standard selection tests (Burgoyne et al., 2021; Martin et al., 2020).

To learn more about the lab’s research, visit our [Publications](https://englelab.gatech.edu/publications.html) page on the website or feel free to ask someone what they are working on!
